Device: controler, sequencer, synthesizer, etc...

Channel: A channel is an independent path over which messages travel to their destination. 16 channels per MIDI device.

Ports: IN, OUT, THRU

16 channels per port.

Port — A connection for the input or output of data.

MIDI Port — The MIDI connections of a MIDI-compatible device. A Multiport, in the context of a MIDI Interface, is a device with multiple MIDI output sockets, each capable of carrying data relating to a different set of 16 MIDI channels. Multiports are the only means of exceeding the limitations imposed by 16 MIDI channels.

MIDI Controller — A term used to describe the physical interface by means of which the musician plays the MIDI synthesizer or other sound generator. Examples of controllers are keyboards, drum pads, wind synths and so on.

MIDI CHANNEL - Most MIDI instruments (synthesizers and sound modules) are capable of generating multiple sounds (instruments) at the same time. Each of these instrument can be assigned to their own channels. The basic MIDI synth has 1 port = 16 channels, but there are also 32 and 64 channel synths available. Channels can be considered as parts in a music score or instruments in an orchestra, or as separate tracks in recording. MIDI sequencers can take advantage of multiple channels, and even multiple synthesizers, creating complex arrangements for bands, even for a large symphonic orchestra.

MIDI DEVICE - Any hardware or software synthesizer, sampler, sound module, drum machine, interface, controller, etc., capable to send and/or receive MIDI data.

MIDI IN, OUT, THRU - MIDI IN, OUT and THRU are the names of MIDI ports on MIDI devices. The MIDI IN port is used to receive MIDI data from the OUT or THRU port of other devices. THE MIDI OUT port is for sending data to the IN port of other devices, and the THRU port provides an extra connection for additional devices. The THRU port will simply pass on the data received from the IN port to other devices, while the OUT port will only send data generated by the device.

MIDI PORT - MIDI ports are the 5-pin connectors on MIDI devices labeled as MIDI IN, MIDI OUT and MIDI THRU. Each MIDI port can transfer 16 discrete channels of MIDI data, controlling as many instruments on one or more modules. The use of computers and MIDI sequencers allow the use of multiple MIDI ports, controlling lots of instruments on lots of modules at the same time thru MIDI interfaces. It's like having a band, an orchestra, and then some...

Channels vs Ports

MIDI messages can be defined by a MIDI port and/or a MIDI channel.  Each port has 16 different channels that can be used to pass data.  MIDI ports are often unique hardware paths, typically indicated by a 5-pin DIN connectors (shown below).  MIDI ports can have their own hardware input and output or all ports can be handled by a single USB connection.

MIDI Ports In Practice

Not every MIDI device includes all of the ports. Some devices only need to transmit or receive, only requiring a MIDI Out or In, respectively.

The MIDI thru port is also optional, sometimes omitted to reduce size or cost.

The implementation of the MIDI thru port is also subject to interpretation. While the spec calls for the hardware implementation shown above, it isn’t always followed. Some instruments use a second UART to re-transmit bytes from the input. This adds latency, which can cause timing problems in long daisy chains.

MIDI ports on the interface and synthesizer are labeled IN and OUT. You connect the MIDI OUT jack of the synthesizer to the MIDI IN jack of the interface, and vice versa.

https://www.midi.org/images/easyblog_articles/43/intromidi.pdf

A typical MIDI device provides MIDI jacks, or “ports,” into which you can plug
a MIDI cable’s connector. There are three types of MIDI ports, and a device
may offer one, two, or all three, depending on what the device does:
• MIDI IN—A MIDI IN jack receives MIDI data from some other MIDI
device.
• MIDI OUT—A MIDI OUT jack sends MIDI data produced by the device
out to another MIDI device.
• MIDI THRU—A device’s MIDI IN port receives MIDI data and passes it
back out unchanged through the MIDI THRU port.

- https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/midi-tutorial/all
- https://whitefiles.org/b1_s/1_free_guides/fg1mt/pgs/h15g.htm

MIDI USB

https://www.midi.org/articles/basic-of-usb

Because data transfer on USb is much faster than 5 pin DIN it is possible to have multiple ports of MIDI (a port is a group of 16 MIDI channels) on a single USB cable.

!! a port is a group of 16 MIDI channels

